Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
the Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez,
and today I'm Jack by Doctor Blaine Fowers. He's
professor of counseling psychology at the University of Miami,
and today we're talking about his book, The The
Science of Virtue, a framework for Research. So, Doctor
Fowers, welcome to the show. It's a big pleasure
to everyone.
Yeah, it's a pleasure for me too.
So, just to introduce the topic because I guess
there's going to be an interplay here since we're
talking about virtue and virtues in the plural, there's
going to be an interplay between philosophy and psychology.
What is virtue theory in moral philosophy?
In moral philosophy, it dates back to Aristotle, actually
to Socrates, but Aristotle put a very nice formulation
on it and a more he's more articulate than
Socrates or Plato are about it, and moral theory,
or I mean, virtue theory is really the idea
that Um, Virtues are aspects of a person that
help them to act in the best way consistently
so that they can then pursue the best kind
of life. Um, AND so these virtues are, um,
elements of an individual's life, uh, that they, um,
have habits and they, they do them, uh, they
practice the virtues spontaneously and naturally. So it's not
something you have to work toward or sacrifice for.
Uh, I mean, well, let me back up a
bit. It is something you have to develop. You
have to develop a habit, but then once the
habit is developed, then they, uh, come into play
uh relatively easily. And that's the idea of virtue
is that you develop, uh, what we would call
a second nature. Uh, WHICH is, uh, the habit
to act fairly or in a friendly way or
in a kind way, um, a compassionate way. So
that, so it becomes a way of life that
one does, um, and so, uh, virtues are always
um, Have a bunch of characteristics. One of them
is that it's, as I said, it's a habit.
A second one is that we have attendant, cognitions
and emotions, things that go along with that to
make it a, so we have a cohesive approach
to things. Um, NOT, not that we have to
force ourselves, but that we just naturally want to
be fair. Um, AND for example, um, The, and
then another feature of it is that it shows
up in action. So this isn't just something we
think or feel, but it's something we do. So
it's a way of life. Um, AND so, uh,
the Aristotle's idea was that a person could develop
all the virtues. Um, WE know as well as
a psychologist, what I know is that Uh, we're
going to be better at some and worse at
others. Uh, SO it's, it's the sort of thing
that we, we make efforts toward and we develop
these habits as best we can, but we're going
to be imperfect, and that's a piece of the
virtue theory that Aerosol didn't really develop, um. He,
if you read the Nicomachian ethics, which is his
primary ethics text, uh, it sounds like people are
kind of working toward perfection. Well, you and I
know that we are never going to be perfect.
Um, WE'RE hopefully we can be good, um, but
we don't. Really think we have to be perfect,
so we do the best we can and sometimes
through fatigue or illness or something else, maybe a
person who's normally pretty virtuous is not able to
do that. Um, SO, um, so it is a
thing that is part of our imperfect lives in
an imperfect world, and we do the best we
can.
But what are virtues? Are they traits or what
characterizes them psychologically?
Yeah, as a psychologist, I see virtues as traits,
um, and I see traits as a big category.
So it includes personality, it includes intelligence, it includes
things like narcissism, um, and, uh, I see character
virtues as a form of trade. It it differs
from personality. I know I'm anticipating one of your
later questions, but um, I'll go ahead and say
it now that because we need to differentiate between
the two because one of the things that happens
with virtues is we're always talking about moral behavior
and moral thinking and moral emotions and so personality
doesn't really have, doesn't build that in. So we
have to have a different way to talk about
it. Another big difference between personality and virtues is
that virtues involve what we could call phrenicis or
practical wisdom. That is, we have to know what
we're doing and we have to be able to
approach things in the right kind of way. And
so having good judgment is the way we do
that. Well, there's no place for reneis in personality
either, so we have to have a differentiation there.
Nevertheless, I see them as traits because they are
habitual ways of living, um, and, um. A person
develops them through practice and, uh, at least that's
the Aristotelian way to think about it. Um, AND,
uh, we practice virtues by just every day. I
mean, one of the things that I'll often ask
my students is how many decisions they think they
make in a, in a single day. Um, AND
when you stop and think about it, we make
thousands of decisions every day. Uh, DECISIONS about what
to wear, how to look, how to talk, uh,
how to, whether to be kind, whether to be,
uh, fair, whether to, um, Just all kinds of
things and um. What, what you try to do
as a virtuous person is you try to make
good decisions about all of those things, decisions that
are going to bring good into the world. Um,
AND by doing that, um, We become more fair
or more honest or more courageous. So if you
practice courage repeatedly, then it's easier and easier to
be courageous. Um, SO it becomes more natural, becomes
more habitual, and that's what we try to do.
So, so there are traits in that they are,
uh, things that we cultivate, things that we practice
and learn. Um, NOW, another difference between personality and
virtue. Is that personality is generally thought of as
dispositions, so we're born with certain dispositions to be
more extroverted, to be more open to experience or
less, to be more neurotic or less neurotic. Um,
SO personality has a kind of a, a genetic
or inherited aspect to it. Uh, VIRTUES aren't like
that. The way Aral put it, he said that.
Uh, WE'RE neither born to be virtuous, nor do
we, are we born to be evil, um, but
we develop capacities along the way. Um, SO I
think that's a good way to think about it
because some people think that humans are either born
bad or born good, um, and I don't think
that way at all. I think we are born
and then we learn how to, how to act
and how to live from the people around us
and from, um, from our peers, from our families,
from our culture, and so forth.
But your book is really about the development of
a science of virtue. So if virtue is already
discussed and studied in philosophy, why should it also
be studied scientifically?
Yeah, that's a good question. The Philosophers have been
talking about virtue for a very long time. Um,
IT'S kind of been, it's waxed and waned over
time. So sometimes they talk about it more, sometimes
less. Right now it's a very, a very big
topic in philosophy. Um, SO, um. Anscom and McIntyre
introduced it in philosophy, and it became a big
topic in the last 50 years, let's say. And
then psychology has taken this on in the last
20 years or so. So it took us a
while to catch up, and there are what's interesting
to me is there are a lot of philosophers
who are interested in virtue ethics. And they're interested
in psychological research about it, so I work. As
much with philosophers as I do with psychologists on
this, um, probably a little bit more actually, um,
because they're very interested in it. And what psychology
has to offer is we have a set of,
uh, methods and we focus on empirical facts, um,
whereas philosophers, um, they tend to talk a lot
about it theoretically, and they might, um, Talk about,
uh, virtues for let's say, uh, alien species. Uh,
SO that's one of the things that some of
them do. Um, AND that's interesting and useful, and
it's something philosophers do, but it's not something psychologists
are particularly interested in. We're interested in this world
and this species, so we focus in on what
humans actually do more than on just abstract thinking
about virtues and so I think philosophy has a
lot to offer because philosophers spend a lot of
time carefully analyzing things and thinking through problems in
a way that psychologists typically do not. So the
philosophy is very, very valuable. Um, NOW what makes
psychology valuable low is this empirical focus. Um, AND
so we try to get some data that verify
various points of view or maybe just confirm various
points of view, um, so it could go either
way. Mhm.
So when it comes to a psychology of virtue,
how does it relate to other subfields in psychology?
Well, I've talked about the relationship between virtue and
personality. Uh, I think that they are related, but
I think that they're different. So I would say
trait is the large category. Personality is one kind
of trait, character is another kind of trait. Um,
THE, uh, what's known sometimes as the dark triad
or dark quatrad is another kind of trait, um,
and, um. So there are different ways to see
it. Um, FROM a social-psychological point of view, a
lot of my work looks very social psychological. Um,
SO virtues are something that happened between people. Um,
AND so we can study how people act in
various circumstances. We can study whether virtues are promoted
or discouraged by certain circumstances. That's really very much
what social psychologists, at least in the United States,
do. So that looks very similar. Developmental psychology is
also important because as I talked about, the virtues
are developed, so there's something that they're cultivated over
time. Um, AND so there's going to be a
developmental history to that. Um, AND one of the
interesting things about human development is that there are
some regularities to it. Um, AND what we find
is that children develop pretty much the same across
cultures. Um, NOW, when you become an adult, as
you become an adult, uh, there are various cultural
differences that show up, but children have, uh, pretty
much, uh, A regular way of, of, of interacting.
So for example, when a baby is born, they
can't do much of anything. All they can do
is suck and cry and eliminate, and they have
a few reflexes. Then over time they learn a
lot of things. So for one thing they learn
is they learn that this is my hand. They
don't know that at first. So a baby will
Wave its hands, but it doesn't know that it's
waving its hands. Um, SO an infant though over
time learns that and then learns to, uh, one
of the most rudimentary things in in development is
mutual gaze, and that leads to the ability to
focus on an object with another person, uh, which
is called a shared attention. Um, AND those two
things develop in order, so you have to have
mutual gaze first. And that's when a baby looks
at you. So if you've held a baby and
just looked at it, which is they're, they're enormously
cute, and they draw our attention. So this is
a very natural thing for people to do. Well,
babies learn how to control and interact socially long
before they can talk or walk or even sit
up. Um, SO development is a very social thing.
Um, SO you have there an interplay between development.
Uh, AND social psychology, uh, personality psychology, all of
it plays into it. So some children are going
to be more prone to longer bouts of mutual
gazes than others. Some like to be touched, some
don't like to be touched as much. Um, SO,
These are things that develop over time, and then
as a child becomes about 3 years old, they
start to become capable of moral action, um. Prior
to 3 years, not so much. They don't really
understand it. Uh, IT takes, it takes a long
time for our brains to develop. Um, AND, um,
but they do start to become capable of moral
action, and so they can start to learn rudimentary
versions of the virtues. So you'll, you'll see parents
teaching their children to be kind, to share, to
be honest, and so on, and they have to
learn all these lessons because at first, The only
thing a child knows is that they want something
and they go after it. They, they try to
get it any way they can. Um, AND so
morality is not really much of a factor prior
to 3 years of age, and it only gradually
becomes one. So by 6, they're pretty clear on
this. Um, AND so, um, It's, it's very interesting
to watch. So if you watch children develop, you
can see these things happen. Um, ALSO, I guess
I would say that virtue relates very strongly to
my profession or sub-discipline, which is counseling psychology. Um,
SO, um, not everybody sees it this way, but
the way I look at it is that Therapy
is an opportunity to create a better life. That's
what we do it for. Um, THAT doesn't mean
it's easy or it's fun all the time. Um,
SO it's sometimes very hard and painful. So we
have to take a look at difficult things. We
have to, uh, resolve, uh, experiences we've had that
are problematic, but the end goal is for people
to have a better life. My belief is that,
uh, to have a better life, we have to
develop good characteristics. So it's natural for me then
to focus on things like courage and honesty and
compassion and fairness. With clients because that's, uh, that's
the way that they develop better lives is by
uh honing those characteristics, um. And one of the
things that I have done a lot of is
marital therapy, um, and what I've come to learn
is that everybody wants, uh, a person of good
character to be their partner, uh, and their friend
and their, uh, family members, they hope to have
good character. So, um, so this is not something
that's just, uh, abstract or, uh, Difficult or anything
like that. It's everyday life. Um, AND that's one
of the things I like about virtue ethics is
that it applies to everything. Um, AND it's just
as important for me to be honest and courageous
as a psychologist as it is for me to
be honest and courageous as a husband or as
a father or as a, um, teacher. Um, SO
it, it cuts across all these domains.
Mhm. And what would you say are the main
challenges of developing a science of virtue?
The biggest challenge, the one that we're struggling with
now is measurement, um, because the vast majority of
virtue science is done with self-report scales. Um, SO
I, you know, if you were one of my
participants, I would give you a measure of virtue,
some virtue or another, and ask you how well
you think you do it. Well, that has some
obvious problems in that. Uh, ONE, you might want
to deceive me. That's the most obvious, um, and
that's the one psychologists spent a lot of time
on, but also, you might be more or less
self-aware. So you might not even know that, um,
let's say, uh, you have a a cruel streak
or you have a, a tendency to take advantage
of people. Uh, YOU might just see that as,
as normal and not, not unusual, and so you,
you wouldn't even report it. So, um, and then
the other thing, the big problem with virtue measurement
is that in theory, virtue should be somewhere between
two extremes. Um, SO, uh, for example, honesty would
be between the extremes of on the one hand,
being dishonest, uh, and on the other hand being
brutally honest, so saying the truth more than you
should, maybe. Um, SO we often use white lies
or little uh courtesies to make life easier, uh,
that don't create much of a problem, we hope.
Um, SO that would be honesty, courage is the
same thing. It's somewhere between Um, cowardice on the
one hand and um brashness or rashness, let's say,
that's a better word, rash, um, that we don't
take account of risks or possible outcomes. Um. And
what the virtue measures mostly do is when you
look at them, more is almost always better. Um,
AND so that's, that's been a difficult challenge for
us to find a way to measure that middle
ground. Um, SO, so measurement's a very big challenge.
Um, I think. Some of the answers to this
problem are to get other reports, not just self-report,
but to get others to say, let's say I'm
the subject of interest, maybe we get my wife
and a friend or a family member to also
say what they think my strengths or weaknesses are.
So that's one way to do it. Another way
to do it is to ask people questions over
a period of time. So maybe I might ask
the virtue questions um twice a day or 3
times a day for 2 weeks. Um. And that
is still self-report, but it tends to be more
valid because people are willing to say in the
last 2 hours I was dishonest with someone, or
in the last 2 hours I acted quite fairly
and they're much more willing to admit faults and
weaknesses for a short period of time than they
are to say, oh, in general I'm a dishonest
person, or in general I'm a cruel person. Um,
So that's another way to do it. And there
are a variety of ways to get around these
challenges, but I think, uh, we need to, we
need to work on it. So virtue science right
now is, um, In its infancy, it's only been
really studied for the last 20 years or so,
and it's, it's going to take a while for
us to get develop the sophistication and clarity that
we need to have. But I think it's gotten
a good start. There are many, many studies of
virtue, and it's, it's, it's documented now that we
can measure it and that that it's pretty much
what I would call a scalar concept. People have
more and less of it. Um, THE, uh, research
so far does not show that the, um, Um,
the deception bias that people worry about. There's a
little bit of it, but there isn't a lot
of it, no more than anything else. Um, AND
particularly if you do, uh, this measurement I talked
about with, uh, uh, having someone answer questions multiple
times a day over the course of a couple
of weeks, um, We find that there's a pretty
normal distribution of virtue trades, which suggests again that
we're probably not seeing a tremendous amount of deception
because people are willing to say, you know, for
the last couple of hours I wasn't a very
nice person, and if they're willing to say that,
then that helps us to eliminate that self-report bias,
that deception bias. So, um, so I'm pretty optimistic
about it. I mean, it's, uh, it's a difficult
road ahead, uh, but, um, I think psychologists have
developed a lot of really wonderful methods that can
be used to, uh, To study virtue as well
as anything else.
So this probably should have been one of my
early questions, but what does virtue mean exactly? For
instance, does it vary cross culturally? And if so,
does that then imply that we should be committed
to a sort of moral relativism or anti-moral realist
stance or not?
OK. Yeah, that's, I think it's an important question
about the relativism because there's no doubt that virtues
do vary by culture. They vary by time as
well. So if we look at, let's say, warrior
cultures, for example, Homer is a really big example
for Aristotle, and it's a useful example for us.
So if we look at the virtues in the
Odyssey and the Iliad, they look quite different than
what we hold as virtues now. Um, SO we're
not as focused on honor. We're not as focused
on battlefield courage. Um, THOSE things do come up
and they are important, but they're not central to
our culture in the way that they seem to
be for the ancient Greeks. Um. So Um, given
that relativism, what it means is that you have
to take culture into account. You can't just measure
it and study it the same way everywhere. And
that's been a tough lesson for psychologists because a
lot of times we think we're studying something so
basic that it's going to be the same across
cultures, but I think culture is a very powerful
influence, so. Now, on the one hand, that that's,
that's one side of it. The other side of
it, I'm going to be very Aristotelian here, is
that we need to be somewhere not in on
the extremes. The other side of it would be
something like relativism where we just kind of throw
up our hands and say, well, it's different everywhere,
so we can't really study it. We can only
study it locally. Um, TO me that's too extreme.
So I would say. That in most cultures you
will see something like courage, for example. Um, AND
uh I just uh edited a book on courage,
um, and we had people from Africa, uh, we
had people from different theoretical points of view like
stoicism. Um, AND Jewish thought and Christian thought and
so forth, and so they all had a little
different take on courage, but they could all talk
about courage, and there was a clear family resemblance
between what they talked about across these different cultural
viewpoints, whether it was religious or cultural or theoretical
differences. There was something there that was important to
everyone. Um, SO we could all talk about it
and all of the chapters made sense. I could
read them and, and they made great sense to
me. So for example, I'm not a stoic, but
we had a chapter on a stoic view of
courage, and it was really informative. I learned a
lot by reading it. Um, WE had a chapter,
as I said, from Africa, and, and this person
uh wrote the A chapter from a Yoruba point
of view. Um, AND so he talked about how
courage was important in his culture and where he
grew up, and it was really very, it was
fun to read because, again, I learned some things
and the Yorubas have a little bit different way
of looking at things. They're very communally oriented, so
for them, courage is always related to your place
in your community. It's never an individual thing. Um,
AND so it's a little bit more, um, communal
than the way that we in the West tend
to look at it in the US and Europe
is what I mean by the West. Um, SO,
Um, so I don't think we need to go
to the extent of relativism, but I do think
we need to talk about virtue as culturally relative,
um, that it does matter. Um, SO that's where
I would put it somewhere, uh, not at either
extreme, but somewhere different from those extremes.
Right. But is there a list of virtues? I
mean, do we already have a complete list of
virtues and if not, is that something that scientific
psychology can help us uncover?
Well, um, that's a, that's a tricky question. Um,
THERE are people who like lists of virtues, um,
and Aerosol has a list, um, and other people
have lists. Um, I don't really think there is
a definitive list. Um, I think that we could
talk about virtues in a variety of ways. So
for, let me give you an example. Um, IS
kindness a virtue that's separate from Uh, say generosity.
Um, WELL, it's hard to say. There's a lot
of overlap between them. So what I would say
is that virtues are in a way a little
bit fuzzy, um, in that they can be defined
in different ways and um they can be separated
out in different ways. Um, SO to me, a
list is not as important as am I acting
appropriately in this current situation. So right now, let's
say, I'm having a discussion with my wife about
chores. Am I behaving in a fair way about
that? So are we going to divide things up
in a way that's equitable to both of us,
um, and so that we share the burdens and
we share the, the benefits of our home life
and our um our marriage, um, or not. And
so, Um, I think that's going to be important
anytime people interact, and in fact we find different
versions of justice or fairness in different cultures, but
every culture has some way to deal with that
question because it's inherent in human relations. It's not
something we can do without. So we have to
have some way to figure out what's a good
way to divide up this pie, the burdens and
the benefits. So, so I think that um It
might be called fairness in one place. It might
be called something a little bit different in another
place, and so. To me, the list doesn't matter
as much as that when we're doing this thing,
dealing with burdens and benefits, we think about it
in an equitable way. We think about it in
a way that is good for everyone and not
just good for me. So I don't, the idea
would be not to take advantage as an individual,
but to try to work with someone else in
a way that we both feel good about, and,
and that's going to look a little different in
different places. So In my parents' generation, for example,
there was a very clear differentiation by gender who
does what? In my marriage and in the current
world, we don't necessarily do that. We divide things
up in terms more in terms of who's good
at what and who's willing to do what and
so, uh, so we try to make it fair
though, even though the content of that fairness might
be a little bit different.
Do you think that in developing a science of
virtue, we have to infuse science with moral values
and if so, is that a problem or not?
I don't see it as a problem. Some people
do. Um, I'm what I've described as a bullet
biter, um, that, what that means is, uh, that's
a, uh, probably an American phrase when people used
to get, uh, Uh, medical treatment, we didn't used
to have anesthesia. So we had to have some
way to deal with the pain. And one way
to deal with the pain is to bite the
bullet, um, or bite a stick or something just
so you could manage the pain as as you
had a medical procedure done. Um, FORTUNATELY, we have
anesthesia now, so we don't have to worry about
that too much anymore. So it's more of a
metaphorical thing. um, BUT I think that all facts
have values associated with them in the human world
and all values have some facts about them. It's
useful to distinguish between the two, but I think
the dichotomy was a mistake that previous generations made.
So that's why I think that virtue can be
studied scientifically, is that it is a It's something
that's inherently valuable. It's good to be virtuous. It's
good to have a good life. We endorse those
things, um, and I don't think we should shy
away from that. Now some people think that in
order to have a science, you have to eliminate
values, and I think that's an error. Um, WHAT
you'll see, if you look in the literature, there's
a lot of debate, well not debate, but a
lot of argumentation. Uh, AGAINST the fact value dichotomy
and almost no one defends it. It's just kind
of a dictum that's been around forever and people
think it's just the way you should do things.
Um, BUT I don't think that's true. So, um,
to me, studying something that's valuable is really important.
I mean, in fact, if you think about it
as a scientist, I am, I care about the
things I study. I'm not neutral about them. Um,
AND so, uh, if I'm studying, say, human development,
I'm interested in how a person develops from an
infant to an adult. And I think there's a
normative path there. I think there's a way in
which we could say, oh well, we can recognize
certain signs of maturity along the way. Um, AND
when someone becomes a full, fully fledged adult, we
can say they're capable of doing things they weren't
capable of when they were 2. So Um That
suggests an endpoint or a telos in Greek terminology.
So there's a goal that we're aiming toward, and
in human development, you can't avoid that goal. And
the goal is a moral term. So that's another
thing that psychologists study as goals. Um, WELL, We
care about our goals. We want to reach them.
We, we work hard for them. And so uh
in that domain of research, you can't really get
away from people's values. Now one of the ways
that psychologists have tried to do that is by
saying, oh well, you as a research participant or
as a human being have goals, but I as
a researcher, I'm neutral about that. Um, WELL, I
think that's a mistake because we're not. Actually neutral.
So if you have the goal of dominating people
and controlling them and being a, say, a human
trafficker, I'm not going to be neutral about that.
That's something I don't like. I think it's a
problem, uh, and I'm going to try to prevent.
Um, SO I, I just don't think that that
value neutrality is a, a tenable position, um. It's
something that people try to do, and they, they
try, they try to say, in the science of
psychology, if nowhere else, I'm going to be neutral
about values. Well, I don't think that's possible for
humans. I don't think we are neutral in that
way. So, uh, so that's what makes A bullet
biter, I think we have to deal with this
problem and we have to recognize that we have
values as researchers, and we try not to have
our values influence what we present as facts, but
it's going to happen and so we need to
be prepared to deal with that. Let me give
you an example of that. So how might values
influence people in ways that they don't know that
they do? Um, SO I'm working on a, a
piece now that deals with the concept of individualism.
Um, AND that's something that's become more and more
widely recognized in the United States and Europe, that
we have a tendency to prioritize the individual, to
see the individual as the basic social reality, and
that everything comes back to the individual. So we
need to promote the autonomy of the individual. We
need to Uh, respect the values that individuals have,
all those kinds of things. Well, that's a point
of view that isn't held in most of the
world. So most of the world is more communally
oriented, so they tend to think about the group
before they think about the individual. The individual has
a role in the group, and that's important. So,
so the big divide then is between individualism and
some kind of communal formulation. Um, SO the, um,
What's happened in American psychology though is that the
individual has been prioritized. So for example, if we
look at someone's well-being or they are they flourishing
or not, that tends to be studied through a
self-report measure. So I tell you how much I'm
flourishing, and that's, that's the end of the story.
So no one else gets a say in that.
I only have my own say. Um, AND that's
a very individual subjective viewpoint. Um, SO I could
think I'm flourishing, but I could be wrong about
that. Um, AND then, uh, how would you know
I was wrong? Well, people around me would say,
yeah, he thinks he has a good life, but
he really doesn't. It's terrible. Uh, LET me tell
you all the way that it's terrible. Um, AND,
um, So, um, So, oh yeah, so it's an
individual subjective focus. Um, NOW the other thing that
psychologists do a lot is we do a lot
of experiments, but the typical experiment is with an
undergraduate student comes into a laboratory that is a
strange situation, and they are given some protocol um
to respond to. um, AND at the very most
they might be responding to a stranger. Almost never
do people study, uh, other individuals in ongoing relationships.
Um, SO they study people separately. So we also,
we kind of have a psychology of strangers, um,
which is a very odd thing because if you
know about strangers and, uh, loved ones, we act
very differently with them. Um, AND we should. I
mean, with people we know and care about, we
develop patterns of interaction, we develop ways of being
together. Um, And that's, uh, uh, so that's another
way that psychologists have focused on the individual. Um,
SO individualism is very pronounced in American psychology. It's
in the theories, um, and so if you look
at the theories with that in mind, if you
look at the research with that in mind, you
can't help but see it. Um, AND now, no
American psychologists or virtually none would say, oh yeah,
I'm, I'm influenced by individualism, and this is the
way I do my research. They don't own that,
but you can see it in their behavior, um,
and you can see it in how they think
about, write about, talk about, feel about what they're
doing. Uh, SO, Um, so I think it's a
very profound value bias, um, and Even though I've
been critical of that throughout my career, so for
30 years I've been criticizing individualism, I still find
myself thinking and talking in individualistic ways because that's
the way I was raised. That's what I was
taught. That's how, that's what is real. So it's,
it's very hard to get around, but once we
get a beat on it, we can start to
say, oh, you know, that's not a very good
way to think about this. So what I need
to think about is Maybe more how I fit
into a group. How I fit into relationships, uh,
and not only what's good for me and what,
what do I want, um. So we need some
balance between the two, I think.
Right. So at a certain point there you mentioned
flourishing. I've already asked you about the virtues, but
I would like to go back to Aristotle a
little bit now and ask you about euaemonia. So
what is euaemonia and how does it relate to
the
virtues? OK. So I'll start by defining it. Um,
IN Greek, uh, you means good. So like we
have the word euphoria, um, and eudaimonia, so it's
good, and a diamond is a quasi-divine, uh, Uh,
being. So for Aristotle, he would say that we
have a dime on something like what we might
think of as a guardian angel, uh, someone who
looks out for us, someone who tries to guide
us, and then I means that's a way of
living. So it means literally good, um, Guardian angel
life. Uh, ANOTHER word that Aristo used that he
used pretty much synonymously with eudaimonia is Makarios, and
that means blessed. So that's a good translation of
that word. So the way I translate eudaimonia is
into English is flourishing. Um, SOME people, uh, philosophers
in particular use the term happiness. And I think
that works from a philosophy, philosophy point of view
because they don't think of it as a temporary
emotion. They think of it more as a way
of life. But for psychologists and ordinary people, if
you say happiness, they think it means an emotion
and something that comes and goes. For Aristotle, it
really meant a way of life. So we're living
in a way that we're guided toward good things,
um, and we're living the best kind of life
a human being can live. IN our circumstances, of
course, because sometimes circumstances are quite bad. Now we're
fortunate to be in countries where things are generally
pretty good. We have food to eat, we have
employment, we have relationships, we have relatively stable governments.
Those are all very good things. And some places
in the world don't have those things, so there's
famine, there are failed states. There are lots of
conflict and so forth. So, so we're very fortunate.
So given those circumstances, we have the opportunity to
craft a good life, and that's what Judamania means
is to build a life that's a good one.
So one of the sayings that Aristotle liked was
um that he said call no man happy until
he is dead. Um, WELL, being dead doesn't sound
really great, but what he meant by that is
we have to look at the complete life, not
just that one moment. So that's why Eudamania is
not an achievement. It's not something we Get to
and then just, we've done it. We're already there.
So it's not like having a PhD or an
MD or a DDS that, you know, you achieve
that and that's once you have it, you have
it. Um, Eomina is a way of life. So,
uh, what that means is that at any time,
uh, that could be, I could lose that. Um,
I could have a good life and then I
could lose it either through some external circumstance or
because I do something dumb or crazy. Um, AND
so. Um, WHAT we need to do is we
need to live well throughout our lives, um, and
that's, you know, that's a pretty good goal, I
think, is to have a good life all the
way through. Um, EVERY once in a while there
are some hiccups and problems. Um, MAYBE we need
a root canal or maybe we break our arm
or something, uh, and we, we. Do what we
need to take care of that so we can
go on living well, and that's the idea of
Eomia. Now the way virtue fits into that, and
I think this is very important, is that virtues
are, as I said, character traits, so the things,
habits that we cultivate, and those habits help us
to live well. Um. So if we live in
a way that is fair and kind and caring,
we're going to have a better life than if
we do the opposite, and I'm convinced of that.
So some people think you should get all the
advantages and you should have all the fun you
can. And that's what a good life is. I
don't think that's true. I think that having good
relationships and being a productive member of a group
are very important things, and that without them we're
kind of lost as individuals and we don't have
the fullest kind of life. And so that was
Aristotle's idea is that because we're human beings, there's
certain things that make sense for humans and that's
what we should strive for, um. So it's not
that I want to. The humanist version is that
I want to actualize myself as a person. I
want to be the best la I can be.
Well, that's great, but Erla said, we're humans before
we have an identity, so we should try to
maximize what it is about us that is our
human nature. That's what is, is maximizing our human
nature, being the best person we can be.
So tell us now about your strive for model
as a new conceptual framework to study virtue.
Yeah, we came up with that. I mean, it's
a, it's a very cute acronym, um, but, uh,
I think it's also very meaningful. And someone, a
reviewer who once told me that, he said, you
know, you need to really emphasize that model because
people can read past it and they're used to
seeing these acronyms that don't mean anything. Well, this
one really does mean something. So the S is
for scalar. Um, AND that's really important if you're
going to study virtue scientifically. You have to have
something you can measure and you can gauge and
you can have more and less of. So that's
what scalar is. And so all virtues are scalar,
that is, a person can be more or less
honest, more or less kind, more or less courageous,
and so forth. Um, AND The T is for
trait. I mentioned before that it was, uh, I
see virtue as a trait. So it's something we
develop. Um, RATHER than are born with, um, but
nevertheless, it becomes trait-like over time. Uh, THEN the
R is for yeah, so it's about a role.
Now this was a great insight and um I've
since come across something called identity theory that focuses
a lot on roles, um, and the point here
is that with roles. Um, WE have, uh, some
roles call for certain virtues in a, in a
very strong way and some roles call for other
kind of virtues. So what we find is if
we study people, we find that they act differently
in one role than another, and one of the
most commonly studied is being at work or being
at home. Another one is in the role of
a student or a friend, and this works really
well with college students, and it turns out people
are different, so they tend to be more conscientious
when they're students and more friendly or affable when
they're in the role of friend. So, and that
makes sense, right? Um, SO you get a higher
degree of some virtues than others in a role.
So let's take the example of a first responder.
What we expect of someone who is a police
officer or an EMS person, an emergency worker, somebody
who drives an ambulance and goes to people who
need immediate medical attention. Um, WE expect courage from
them in a way that's going to surpass what
most of us have. Um, AND so, uh, that
role really calls for that. If we think about
a parent, that's another kind of role. So we
have to have a parent needs to be alone.
A person needs to be someone who cares about
their offspring and takes care of them in a
unilateral way. Well, that's a role that's very important
as well. So it calls for characteristics that revolve
around caring and responsibility and structure. Um, SO, uh,
the roles matter. Um, THE, um. The, uh, interactions,
yeah, so, um, the idea there is that. Uh,
WE, that our virtue traits interact with situations. Um,
SO in some situations, uh, they're going to call
for a very strong, uh, virtue response or a
particular virtue response. Um, SO if we think about,
let's, let's think about like a, a time like
someone's birthday. Um, SO I have to be It's
important when someone's going to have an event like
this that I think in terms of what kind
of gift do I want to buy them or
or find for them. And I might buy it,
I might make it, I might do something else.
Um. So in that situation, generosity is really important.
So I want to be able to give a
gift that they're going to like, that's appropriate to
the situation. That's not too big a gift, it's
not too small a gift, um, that is something
that's, uh, geared toward their likes and dislikes, um,
and so that's, that shows up there. But in
another situation, generosity may not be the most important
thing. Uh, SO in another situation, fairness might be
what's important that I interact with someone in a
fair way. Um, SO the situations are important, um,
and we don't want to think that, uh, people
have a trait like Uh, uh, a character trait,
a virtue trait, and they're gonna do that all
the time. Well, we don't do anything all the
time. We do things according to what makes sense,
what's appropriate to the situation, and that's what the
interactions mean. So V is for values, and again
that comes back to that fact value dichotomy that
I think that we, we do study things we
value, we care about, and so that's important to
be able to take note of. And then E
is for Edimona. Um, AND that's the whole point
of having virtues. So virtu. Uh, LEARNING virtues and
being virtuous is not about just gritting your teeth
and doing the right thing even though you don't
want to. It's about living a good life. It's
about having a felicitous life. Um, AND so when
we learn these traits, then we're learning how to
live in a good way as a human being.
And so that's you doineia. And then the 4
is for the four features of virtue, which, um,
Starts with practical wisdom, which I talked about, uh,
as renneis or good judgment. We have to be
able to use good judgment as we deal with
virtues, and then it's emotions, uh, cognitions, and behavior.
Those, that's, uh, three things that all psychologists like
to talk about and think about. Uh, SO virtues
show up in all those domains, uh, and the
idea is for us to have some congruence between
our actions, our feelings, and our thoughts. So again,
it's something that comes naturally it's something we want
to do, it's not something we struggle about. Now
of course we're imperfect, so sometimes all of us
struggle, sometimes all of us do the wrong things,
um, but in the main, we try to do
as much. Uh, VIRTUOUSLY as possible.
Mhm. And what are the main goals of the
science of virtue, both the intellectual and the practical
goals?
Um, I'll start with the intellectual goals because that's
where I spend most of my effort. Um, WHAT
we want to do is to be able to,
uh, uh, assess these virtues and figure out which
things really do conduce to a good life. Um,
AND I think that those are, can be empirical
questions. They are also conceptual questions where we, um,
try to, uh, develop a theory that's consistent and,
uh, articulate. Um, BUT, uh, we also want to
find, uh, the facts about it. So we don't
want to just think about it, and that's where
I think psychology is very useful is that we
can, we can actually study things. And try to
get an empirical feel for um what does courage
look like, how does it show up? What does
it look like for someone to be honest, um,
what, um. What do we think, um. Uh, FAIRNESS
consists in, um, and then the ultimate question is,
do those things lead to a good kind of
life? Sorry, I'm having a little trouble with my
voice. I um,
no problem.
Yeah. It's, I've had, um, I think some new
allergies that uh cause I don't seem to be
sick, but I, um, cough quite a bit and
have a bit of a hoarse voice, so I
apologize for that. Um, Yeah, so that's the intellectual
goal is to try to understand this as best
we can, and, and then the practical goals, of
course, are that we want to encourage virtue. So
it's a good thing that we want to see
more of. So we might work on some interventions
to help people to be more generous or more
honest or more fair or more courageous. Um, AND,
uh, and help people to know, you know, what
it means to be honest. So, so the thing
is, it's not hard to say, it's good to
be generous. It's hard to say what is generosity
in this situation. So, um, when I, you know,
I don't know how it is in Portugal, but
when I drive my car around at intersections there
frequently will be people who are begging. So do
I give them money or do I not give
them money? Would it be a generous good thing
to give them money or would it be a
bad thing? And that's something everybody has to decide,
and they have to work out some way of
what do I do with people who have needs
that they can't satisfy themselves. So how do I
orient myself to that? Do I just ignore them?
Do I give them money? Do I give to
a charity? What do I do? Um, AND so
we'll have to work that out. And so deciding
how to be generous is the hard thing, not
whether to be generous or not, um, because that's
a, that's a relatively easy question. If you ask
someone, they would say, yeah, I'm a generous person,
you know, but how are you generous? Then, then
that's where the rubber meets the road.
Right. So let me ask you then just one
last question. How do you look at the future
of the science of virtue? I mean, uh, do
you, are there any specific questions you would like
to see answered? Any particular lines of research that
you think are going to be explored by people
who work in this field?
Yeah, one of the things that interests me, uh,
particularly is this interaction of situation and character trait.
Um, SO one study we did, for example, we
set up a scenario. This was an experimental study,
so it's guilty of all the things I said
about that. Um, BUT it's a good, it helps
us to get some data in some ways. So
we gave people a situation where they could act
more and less fairly. And the situational prompts encourage
them to act less fairly. And then we also
assess their fairness traits. So what we're interested in
is, are people who report that they're fair, are
they fair across the board in the situation that
encourages unfairness and in a neutral situation? And then
are the people who say that they're less fair
or are they more influenced by the situation? Well,
that's exactly what we found. Um, SO that interaction
is really interesting because, um, I, as I said
before, it's really important for us to look at
how people act in different situations, not expect them
to act the same way in every situation. And
so, If a fair person is going to be
fair regardless of the circumstances, then that's the sort
of thing we want to encourage and we hope
for. Um, AND if someone is going to take
advantage when they think they can get away with
it, that's not so great. Um, NOW, of course,
there are lots of people who do that, and
so there's a lot of room for interventions there,
um, and I think that's another kind of research
that would be really important. We have quite a
lot of research that encourages generosity. So that's been
a, a target of a number of people who
find that you can increase generosity, and it turns
out, interestingly enough, that when people are more generous,
they're happier. Um, SO the people who were given
the task, for example, there'll be a, there's one
study that's really wonderful and it was done in
136 countries, so it's not just one place. Uh,
THE experimenter gave participants a meaningful amount of money,
um, and said to one set of people, spend
this money on someone else, do something nice for
someone else with the money. And he said to
another set of people, spend this money on yourself,
do something nice for you. The people who spend
it on other people were happier, uh, on average
than the people who spend it on themselves. This
is across many, many cultures. So, uh, it suggests
that it's not just a US thing or a
Christian thing or any other kind of thing, it's
a human thing that we are, um, At our
best when we're being generous to other people. Um,
AND there's also, there's a lot of research by
some people, uh, two women named Crocker and Canovelo
that have demonstrated this. And what they show over
and over again is that people who are nice
to other people or good to other people are
happier and, and they do better in life, and
people who are focused on themselves do less well
in life. Um, AND, um. So, uh, what they
say is that the idea that people are ultimately
self-interested is exaggerated. Maybe it's a complete fabrication. So
that's something that's, that's an article of faith in
the United States is that we should look out
for number one. But it turns out that it's
probably wrong, uh, because these women study Americans and
they find that Americans who give are happier than
Americans who look out for number one, mostly. Um,
SO, so I think, um, Uh, that's great research
and so, so interventions are another kind of thing.
Um, THERE'S a, um. In the United States, we
call it character education. Uh, THAT'S starting up in
Europe now. There's a, an association for character and
virtue education, um, and I think it's a, it's
wonderful. And what they're doing in Europe, um, is
that they are trying to integrate the virtue science
and the virtue theory from the beginning. We didn't
do a very good job of that in the
United States, so character education. IS somewhat divorced from
virtue ethics, um, and I think that relationship should
get closer. So I like very much what the
Europeans are doing, and I hope that the, that
American character educators will pay more and more attention
to virtue ethics. And so that's a whole other
line of research is how to apply this, uh,
in schools with children, um. And I think that
I think we can do a lot of good
there. So there are lots and lots of kinds
of research. Some of them are very basic sorts
of research, how do we understand virtues? Can we
measure them, and so forth. And then there's intervention
research and one kind of intervention research is educational
methods. Um, SO I have a student now to
give you another example, uh, who's teaching a course
on udaimonia basically. And she's collecting data with students
in her course and students in another course, and
she's going to compare whether or not the people
in her course have greater degrees of udominia than
the ones in the other course. Um, AND there
are lots of measures of this. And so, um,
this is an intervention study and so it's a
very interesting kind of study. That we hope that
people will benefit from this course. We don't know
that, so we're going to find out. And the
great thing about virtue Science, it helps us to
document the things that are the case and to
um Eliminate things that maybe people want to believe
or have believed in the past that aren't, uh,
aren't really reflected in reality. So, um, I mentioned
this case of looking out for number one, that's
been a steadfast belief in this country for a
long time. Turns out that it's mostly wrong, uh,
and we should never believe that, and we should
try to eliminate that view because it's not good
for people and it doesn't make a good life.
Um, SO it's not a good thing.
Right, so the book is again the Science of
virtue, a framework for research. I'm leaving a link
to it in the description of the interview. And
Doctor Fowers, apart from the book, are there any
places on the internet where people can find your
work?
Um, WELL, Google is quite a tool, um, and
if, you know, you've probably done this yourself, you
Google yourself, and it's kind of amazing what comes
up. So, um, all told now I have published
8 books, or no, 7, and I have written.
Uh, ANOTHER couple of books, and I'm working on
a third one. So, uh, I'm easy to find,
uh, and, uh, and I published a lot of,
uh, scholarly articles as well, so it's not hard
to find, uh, things that I've done. Um. But
the, the book The Science of Virtue is one
of the things I'm most proud of and very
happy to talk with you about, uh, because it's,
it's just fun for me to talk about virtues.
Uh, IT'S really a very interesting topic and there's
no end of the depth. I've been studying it
for 30 years and I'm still learning things.
And thank you so much for taking the time
to come on the show. It's been a real
pleasure to talk with you.
It's great to meet you too, and I thank
you for your interest in my work.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullern, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alexandam Castle, Matthew Whitting Berarna Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika
Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the Matter
Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Nes Colin Holbrookfield governor Michael
Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnsergoro and Hal Herzognun
Macha Joan Labrant John Jasent and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus Fran David Sloan
Wilson, asilla dearraujuru and roach Diego Londono Correa. Yannick
Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikolbar Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine,
Gary Galman Sam of Zallidrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian
Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Franco Bartolotti
Gabrielon Corteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith
Jen Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke
Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams,
Diocosta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old
Eringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grayigoren, Jeff
McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner,
Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica
Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis,
Valentin Steinman, Per Croli, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aart,
Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner,
Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff, Sean Nelson, Mike
Levine, and Jos Necht. A special thanks to my
producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom
Venneden, Bernardin Curtis Dixon, Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and
Nick Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Levender,
Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for
all.